## METHOD

## Open Access

## SMOPCA: spatially aware dimension reduction integrating multi-omics improves the efficiency of spatial domain detection

<!-- image -->

Mo Chen 1,2† , Ruihua Cheng 3† , Jianuo He 1,2 , Jun Chen 4* and Jie Zhang 1,2*

† Mo Chen and Ruihua Cheng contributed equally to this work.

*Correspondence: Chen.Jun2@mayo.edu; zhangj\_ai@nju.edu.cn

1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China

2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China

- 3 Big Data Statistics Research Center, Tianjin University of Finance and Economics, Tianjin, China
- 4 Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

<!-- image -->

## Abstract

Technological advances have enabled us to profile multiple omics layers with spatial information, significantly enhancing spatial domain detection and advancing a variety of biomedical research fields. Despite these advancements, there is a notable lack of effective methods for modeling spatial multi-omics data. We introduce SMOPCA, a Spatial Multi-Omics Principal Component Analysis method designed to perform joint dimension reduction on multimodal data while preserving spatial dependencies. Extensive experiments reveal that SMOPCA outperforms existing single-modal and multimodal dimension reduction and clustering methods, across both singlecell and spatial multi-omics datasets derived from diverse technologies and tissue structures.

## Background

Humans and many other eukaryota are made from billions of cells, with a variety of cell types, functional states [1], and cellular activities [2-4]. Cellular phenotype and functional states are intrinsically regulated at multiple 'omics' layers, involving the genome, epigenome, transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome [5]. In addition, the microenvironment [1] and neighboring cells could also modulate functional states of a cell through cell interactions [3, 6], cell signaling, and other microenvironmental factors.

The  rapid  development  in  multimodal  sequencing  technologies  [7]  enables  us  to simultaneously profile different omics layers [8], which provides a complete representation of cellular identity [8], allows the detailed classification of cell types, subtypes and functional states, and facilitates deep biological mechanism investigation in health and disease  [9-19].  For  example,  CITE-seq  [20]  (cellular  indexing  of  transcriptomes  and epitopes by sequencing) and REAP-seq [21] (RNA expression and protein sequencing) have been developed to simultaneously quantify cell surface protein and transcriptomic data within a single-cell readout. Furthermore, emerging single-cell multi-omics technologies, including SNARE-seq [22] (single-nucleus chromatin accessibility and mRNA

© The Author(s) 2025. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://  creat  iveco  mmons.  org/  licen  ses/  by-  nc-  nd/4.  0/.

<!-- image -->

expression sequencing) and SMAGE-seq [23] (10X Single-Cell Multiome ATAC + Gene Expression), aim to jointly capture chromatin accessibility and gene expression within individual cells. The biological information provided by each modality generally has its own strength and weakness, and different modalities from the multi-omics dataset are complementary [21, 24-26] in cell type identification.

Recent advances in spatial multi-omics technologies [5, 27, 28] further allow us to profile  different  aspects  of  a  cell,  while  retaining  spatial  information,  and  are  expected to improve spatial domain detection and foster significant progress in a variety of biomedical research fields. In 2020, Liu et al. presented DBiT-seq [29] (deterministic barcoding in tissue for spatial omics sequencing) for co-mapping of mRNAs and proteins in a formaldehyde-fixed tissue slide via next-generation sequencing (NGS). Subsequently, Liu et al. extended co-indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes (CITE) to the spatial dimension (spatial-CITE-seq [27]) and profiled hundreds of proteins and whole transcriptome in  human  tissues,  revealing  spatially  distinct  germinal  center  reactions  in  tonsil  and early immune activation in skin at the Coronavirus Disease 2019 mRNA vaccine injection  site.  Jiang  et  al.  in  2023  introduced  the  microfluidic  indexing-based  spatial  assay for transposase-accessible chromatin and RNA-sequencing (MISAR-seq [28]), offering a  method for the spatially  resolved  joint  profiling  of  chromatin  accessibility  and  gene expression. Through the application of MISAR-seq to the developing mouse brain, they conducted a comprehensive study on tissue organization and spatiotemporal regulatory dynamics during mouse brain development. Despite technical variations, capturing the inherent spatial dependencies in spatial domain detection significantly extends our ability to annotate cell types, improves downstream analysis (e.g., visualization, differential expression  analysis,  gene  set  enrichment  analysis,  trajectory  analysis,  and  so  on),  and facilitates the investigation of biological mechanisms [30-33].

To fully exploit the complementary and mutual enhancing nature of single-cell multiomics data, joint dimension reduction and clustering analysis algorithms have been proposed [25, 34, 35]. For example, BREM-SC [24], CiteFuse [36], Seurat V4 [37], Specter [38], TotalVI [34], and scMDC [25] (Additional file 5: Supplementary Note 1) that combine multiple cellular  views  in  an  unbiased  manner  have  been  proposed  for  the  clustering  analysis  of  the  single-cell  multi-omics  data  in  the  past  years.  Nevertheless,  to our best knowledge, none of the aforementioned methods have the capability to model spatial dependencies in the data. Therefore, current computational methods for singlecell  multi-omics  data  may  not  be  optimal  for  analyzing  spatial  multi-omics  datasets, as they assume independence among cells or spots and fail to integrate crucial spatial information.

Recently developed methods for analyzing spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT) data  may  not  be  directly  applicable  to  spatial  multi-omics  data.  For  example,  SpatialPCA  [33],  which  is  based  on  the  generalized  probabilistic  principal  component analysis [39] (GPPCA), is a state-of-the-art method to model the spatial correlation structure across tissue locations and learn better low-dimensional representations for the spatial transcriptomics data. However, SpatialPCA cannot be directly applied to spatial multi-omics data. Naïve concatenation of different omics data before applying SpatialPCA ignores the potential varying informativeness of each omics datatype. In contrast, SpaVAE [40] is a spatial variational autoencoder model developed by Tian et al. in 2024 mainly for modeling the SRT data. Similar to scVI [41] and TotalVI [34], SpaVAE  can  be  extended  to  characterize  spatial  multi-omics  data  by  adding  additional network branches and modifying loss functions. In 2024, Long et al. proposed SpatialGlue  [42],  a  graph  neural  network  model  with  a  dual-attention  mechanism designed to detect spatial domains from spatial multi-omics data. Although SpaVAE and SpatialGlue differ in the implementation, they share the same limitation that they could only process at most two modalities and have to re-design the network architecture completely if three or more modalities are available. To alleviate the restriction,  Long  et  al.  provided  'SpatialGlue\_3M'  (https://  github.  com/  Jinmi  aoChe  nLab/ Spati  alGlue\_  3M),  an  extended  version  of  SpatialGlue,  tailored  for  integrating  data with exactly 3 modalities. However, even with this extension, SpatialGlue still could not  handle  dataset  with ≥ 4  modalities.  Unlike  SpaVAE  and  SpatialGlue,  MEFISTO [43]  is  a  factor  analysis-based  method  developed  for  modeling  spatial  multimodal data.  MEFISTO  can  natively  handle  data  with  three  or  more  modalities.  However, existing  studies  [42]  have  shown  that  MEFISTO's  performance  is  less  competitive compared to SpatialGlue. In addition, training a MEFISTO model takes significantly longer (Additional file 3: Table S2). Methods that can effectively and simultaneously model various data modalities and spatial information are scarce.

To fill the methodological gap, we introduce a novel spatial multi-omics principal component analysis method, named SMOPCA, to optimize the entire computational pipeline  for  dimension  reduction,  clustering  analysis  and  spatial  domain  detection, and  deliver  more  accurate  results  for  downstream  analytical  tasks  in  spatial  multiomics  studies.  To  our  best  knowledge,  this  is  the  first  principal  component  analysis model that specifically designed for modeling spatial dependencies in the spatial multi-omics  data.  SMOPCA  simultaneously  models  different  data  modalities  and spatial  information  and  infers  a  joint  low-dimensional  representation  over  multiple omics data types. The latent factors of SMOPCA encapsulate variations across data modalities, facilitating the discernment of biological signals. We theoretically demonstrate that the latent factors learned by SMOPCA, which integrate information from multi-modal  data,  are  valid  and  more  stable  than  performing  dimension  reduction on each modality separately. The learned latent representations could maintain the spatial correlation structure across tissue locations and, therefore, preserve the neighboring  similarity  of  the  original  spot  in  the  low-dimensional  manifold.  The  latent vectors obtained from SMOPCA can be directly paired with K -means clustering to improve spatial domain detection and enhance downstream analysis for spatial multiomics data, as verified through experiments conducted on recently published spatial multi-omics datasets. In addition, SMOPCA is readily applicable to model single-cell multi-omics data with the pseudo-spatial coordinates generated from the nonlinear method UMAP [44]. It could effectively  borrow  the  strength  from  another  dimension reduction method to preserve local clustering structures by naturally employing a  prior  multivariate  normal  distribution  defined  on  the  pseudo-spatial  coordinates. When applied to single-cell multi-omics datasets obtained from diverse technologies and  tissue  structures,  SMOPCA  consistently  delivers  superior  or,  at  least,  comparable results compared to existing methods, including the best deep learning-based approach.  Like  PCA,  SMOPCA  demonstrates  enhanced  robustness  and  stability, when applied to different datasets, and we hope it could contribute to the in-depth understanding of the mechanisms in biological and biomedical studies.

## Results

## An overview of SMOPCA

Figure 1 displays the schematic diagram of the proposed dependency-aware dimension  reduction  method  SMOPCA.  As  shown  in  Fig.  1,  SMOPCA  takes  multiple modalities Y = { Y 1, . . . , YK } and  location  information S = { s 1, . . . sn } as  inputs,  and learns joint latent factors Z through factor analysis models. To integrate spatial location  information, we assume each latent factor Zl adheres  to  a  multivariate  normal (MVN) prior distribution  with  expected  values 0 and  covariance  matrix /Sigma1 l ∈ R n × n calculated  based  on  the  location  information S to  explicitly  capture  the  spatial dependencies in the latent space across cells or spots. Technical details and rationale of SMOPCA are given in ' Methods' and Additional file 5: Supplementary Note 3. The posterior distribution of Z encapsulates valuable correlation information and could be utilized to explain the variance of the data. The outputs of SMOPCA can be seamlessly  integrated  with  existing  analytical  tools  to  facilitate  and  improve  downstream analyses, including dimension reduction, visualization, clustering analysis, differential expression analysis, and many other analytical tasks, in spatial multi-omics studies.

Fig. 1 The architecture of SMOPCA model. SMOPCA is a dependency-aware dimension reduction method that accepts multiple modalities Y = { Y 1 , . . . , YK } and location information S = { s 1 , . . . s n } as inputs. It models each modality Yi through a factor analysis model with joint latent factors Z . We assume that each latent factor Z l follows a multivariate normal (MVN) prior distribution with covariance matrix calculated based on the location information S to explicitly capture the spatial dependencies in the latent factors Z across cells or spots { c 1 , c 2 , . . . , c n } . As a result, the obtained low-dimensional components Z from SMOPCA encapsulate valuable spatial correlation information and can be seamlessly integrated with existing analytical tools to facilitate and enhance downstream analyses (e.g., dimension reduction, visualization, clustering analysis, differential expression analysis, and many other analytical tasks) for spatial multi-omics studies

<!-- image -->

## Simulation studies

## Simulation study I

To numerically evaluate the effectiveness and robustness of SMOPCA, we conducted simulation  experiments  using  real  single-cell  multi-omics  datasets  with  simulated cell  locations.  Here,  we  propose  to  evaluate  the  performance  of  SMOPCA  on  five CITE-seq datasets, including the Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMC) dataset [38] and a series of Mouse Spleen Lymph Node datasets (SLN111D1, SLN111D2, SLN208D1, and SLN208D2) [34]. Additionally, we incorporate two Single-cell Multiome ATAC and Gene Expression (SMAGE-seq) datasets [22, 23] derived from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, denoted as PBMC3K and PBMC10K, comprising  approximately  3000  and  10,000  cells,  respectively.  Detailed  information  on  the experimental  datasets  is  provided  in  section  '  Public  real  datasets'  and  Additional file 2: Table S1. To make a comprehensive comparison, we evaluate our model against widely used cell clustering methods developed for CITE-seq data (i.e., BREM-SC, CiteFuse, SC3, scMDC, Seurat, TotalVI, Tscan, SpatialPCA, and PCA + K-means) and additional methods designed specifically for SMAGE-seq data (i.e., chromVAR [45], cisTopic [46], LSA [47], PeakVI [48], SCALE [49], scMDC, Seurat, SpatialPCA, and PCA + K-means), as detailed in section ' Competing methods.' Notably, the competing  methods  include  approaches  specifically  designed  for  multimodal  data  clustering  analysis  (e.g.,  scMDC,  BREM-SC,  CiteFuse,  and  Seurat)  and  models  developed for  learning  low-dimensional  embeddings  for  either  single-modal  or  multimodal data  (e.g.,  TotalVI).  Furthermore,  the  evaluation  incorporates  two  prominent  clustering tools, SC3 and Tscan, specifically designed for single-cell data analysis, along with a widely used general clustering framework PCA + K-means, serving as baseline methods. It is worth noting that SpatialPCA, a spatially aware dimension reduction method proven to be effective in spatial domain detection for spatial transcriptomics, is also utilized as a robust baseline method for thorough comparisons across all analyses.

Due to the absence of cell location information in the single-cell multi-omics datasets  (e.g.,  PBMC,  SLN111D1,  SLN111D2,  SLN208D1,  SLN208D2,  PBMC3K,  and PBMC10K), we try to simulate the spatial location for each cell. Inspired by the sixlayered human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) datasets [50], we assume that cells  from  the  same  cluster  are  proximate,  and  distinct  cell  types  exhibit  layer-wise patterns. For a single-cell multi-omics dataset with n cells,  we  map  the  cells  onto  a simulated 2D grid (as detailed in ' Data simulation' section). Specifically, we shuffle the cells by randomly ordering the cell types and, within each cell type, randomly permutating the cells. We allocate the cells to the grid locations, proceeding row by row and column by column. Additional file 1: Fig. S1-S7 ('Simulated Coordinates') display an example of simulated cell locations for different datasets. As our simulation studies  are  based on real multi-omics data with zero inflation and over-dispersion (e.g., gene and protein expressions from the CITE-seq data, and gene and peak measurements from the SMAGE-seq data), the simulated datasets are also zero-inflated and over-dispersed. Without loss of generality, the simulated coordinates have the flexibility to undergo transformations or rotations, yielding a distinct set of locations while preserving the cell-to-cell distances. To ensure a thorough comparison, for each real single-cell multi-omics dataset, we randomly generated 10 simulated locations resulting in 10 simulated datasets and subsequently assessed the clustering performance of different methods for each simulated dataset.

We  visualized  the  simulated  spatial  coordinates  and  the  low-dimensional  representations learned by SpatialPCA and SMOPCA for a single simulation in Additional file 1: Fig. S1-S7 ('Simulated Coordinates, ' 'SpatialPCA-Sim, ' and 'SMOPCA-Sim'). As shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S1-S7 ('Simulated Coordinates, ' 'SpatialPCA-Sim, ' and 'SMOPCA-Sim'), the latent vectors learned by SMOPCA exhibit improved capacity to distinguish between different cell types compared to SpatialPCA, where cells from different types are mixed together.

Figure  2a,b  illustrate  the  clustering  performance  of  SMOPCA  and  the  competing methods on five CITE-seq and two SMAGE-seq datasets with simulated spatial coordinates, respectively. The detailed results are shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S8-S9. The evaluation is based on three distinct metrics: Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI), Normalized Mutual Information (NMI), and Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) (Please refer to the '  Evaluation  metrics'  section  for  details).  These  metrics  act  as  quantitative  measurements for evaluating the quality of clustering results  obtained  from  various  methods. For each dataset, we conducted the experiments 10 times with different simulated coordinates. As shown in Fig. 2a,b and Additional file 1: Fig. S8-S9, both SMOPCA and SpatialPCA exhibit  superior  performance  compared  to  PCA + K-means,  highlighting  the efficacy of simulated spatial coordinates in helping to capture the inherent structure of the data. It also demonstrates from another perspective that the capability of SMOPCA and SpatialPCA in modeling location information or cell-to-cell dependency is instrumental in achieving more accurate clustering results. Moreover, SMOPCA outperforms SpatialPCA, which takes concatenated data from different modalities as inputs, across all three metrics (AMI, NMI, and ARI).

In addition, SMOPCA demonstrates much better results compared to all other methods, including scMDC, which is recognized as a leading method for clustering analysis in single-cell multi-omics data. This observation holds true for both simulated CITE-seq and SMAGE-seq datasets across all three metrics (i.e., AMI, NMI, and ARI). We further present the results in a unified manner in Additional file 1: Fig. S10-S12,S14-S16. It is evident that when two metrics are considered simultaneously, SMOPCA consistently maintains its superior position.

We rank all methods according to their performance for each dataset. The ranking is determined based on the median of the metric values across multiple runs for each dataset, thereby incorporating the consideration of performance stability. Additional file 1: Fig.  S13  and  Additional  file  1:  Fig.  S17  show  the  averaged  rank  and  standard  error  of each method across different experimental datasets. It is evident that, when examining the averaged rank, SMOPCA consistently outperforms other methods.

We  also  compared  to  recently  developed  methods,  SpaVAE  and  SpatialGlue.  As shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S18-S19, SMOPCA outperforms SpaVAE and SpatialGlue on the real single-cell multi-omics datasets with simulated spatial coordinates. In addition, based on the simulated datasets, we demonstrate that SMOPCA, which integrates multiple modalities, outperforms methods that operate on each modality individually (Additional file 1: Fig. S20-S21). To study the robustness of SMOPCA, we performed sensitivity  analysis  by  examining  its  performance  with  different  kernels, kernel parameters ( ν = 0.5 , ν = 1.5 ,  and ν = 2.5 ),  number of components, data normalization methods (i.e., LogNormalize, SCTransform, and VST), and gene selection methods (i.e., SVG [51] and HVG). Results in Additional file 1: Fig. S22-S31 show that SMOPCA is quite  robust  to  different  parameter  settings  and  preprocessing  procedures. Taken together, these results highlight the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed  method  in  exploiting  spatial  information  to  achieve  improved  dimension reduction and clustering performance.

Fig. 2 Clustering performance of SMOPCA and competing methods on simulated data. a Clustering results of SMOPCA and competing methods on 5 CITE-seq datasets with simulated spatial coordinates. b Clustering results of SMOPCA and competing methods on 2 SMAGE-seq datasets with simulated spatial coordinates. c Clustering results of SMOPCA and competing methods on 12 simulated 3-omics samples. SpatialGlue uses the implementation 'SpatialGlue\_3M' (https://  github.  com/  Jinmi  aoChe  nLab/  Spati  alGlue\_  3M) for modeling the 3 omics data. Each dot represents an experiment on an individual dataset. All boxplots are standard boxplots, which display the distribution of data by presenting the inner fence (the whisker, taken to 1.5 × the interquartile range, or IQR, from the quartile), first quartile, median, third quartile, and outliers

<!-- image -->

## Simulation study II

Clustering analyses in existing single-cell multi-omics and spatial multi-omics research (e.g.,  TotalVI,  MOFA  [35],  scMDC,  MEFISTO,  SpaVAE,  SpatialGlue,  and  many  others)  have  mainly focused on two omics modalities. To demonstrate the capabilities of SMOPCA in analyzing  data  with  more  modalities,  we  simulated  datasets  with  three modalities. Following SpaVAE [40], we employed SRTsim [52] to simulate three omics modalities  based  on  the  LIBD  human  dorsolateral  prefrontal  cortex  (DLPFC)  dataset [50]. The DLPFC data have twelve tissue sections, spanning six neuronal layers and the white matter from three human brains. For each tissue section, we simulated three count matrices for the three modalities based on the SRT data (detailed in ' Data simulation' section). We next applied SMOPCA to the twelve simulated sections. The results in Fig. 2c and Additional file 1: Fig. S46-S48 demonstrate that SMOPCA outperforms PCA + K-means, SpatialPCA, SpaVAE, and SpatialGlue (SpatialGlue\_3M), and the performance differences between SMOPCA and other methods are statistically significant under the paired t -test (Additional file 4: Table S3). The performance of SMOPCA with different kernels and gene selection methods (i.e., SVG [51] and HVG) are provided in Additional  file  1:  Fig.  S49-S50.  These  findings  highlight  the  distinct  advantage  of  our model in analyzing multi-omics data.

## Application to spatial multi-omics data

## Application to spatial CITE-seq data

Recent advancements in sequencing technologies have enabled simultaneous profiling of gene expression and surface protein abundance at the level of individual cells or spots within  spatial  genomics  data  [27,  29].  To  demonstrate  the  capability  in  modeling  real spatial multi-omics data, we applied SMOPCA to analyze a real spatial-CITE-seq data of human tonsil tissue [27] (Additional file 2: Table S1). Following existing studies [51], we employed SPARK [53] to identify spatially variable genes (SVGs), benefiting from its higher statistical power. We selected up to 3000 significant SVGs, with a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.05, as input to our model. Note that the filtering process was limited to genes (mRNA data), and all proteins were included.

We  compared  our  model  with  state-of-the-art  methods,  including  scMDC,  Seurat, TotalVI,  and  many  others,  commonly  employed  for  integrating  CITE-seq  data.  Similar to SMOPCA, both SpatialPCA and TotalVI are generative models. In addition, the weighted-nearest  neighbor  (WNN)  functionality  in  Seurat  package,  which  integrates gene  and  protein  modalities,  was  used  as  a  competing  method.  We  also  compared SMOPCA  with  newly  developed  spatial  multi-omics  methods,  including  MEFISTO, SpatialGlue, and SpaVAE. Following Tian et al. [40], we applied the K -means clustering to the latent embeddings learned by dimension reduction methods, namely SMOPCA, SpaVAE, SpatialPCA, PCA, and TotalVI, to obtain 7 clusters.

In Fig. 3a,b and Additional file 1: Fig. S51, we show the overall clustering results and the learned latent vectors from competing methods. The clustering pattern from SMOPCA is spatially smoother and is more concordant with the tissue image (Fig. 3a,b). Evaluating the spatial smoothness using Moran's I and LISI scores [54] reveals that the clustering results of scMDC, Seurat, TotalVI, and PCA + K-means are spatially noisier (i.e., lower Moran's I score and higher LISI score) than SMOPCA and SpatialPCA (Fig. 3a-c and Additional file 1: Fig. S52), highlighting the importance of using spatial information. Notably, SMOPCA achieves the highest Moran's I score and the lowest LISI score compared to SpatialPCA, MEFISTO, SpatialGlue, and SpaVAE, indicating reduced mixing of different cell types and increased homogeneity within clusters. As expected, SMOPCA also outperforms methods applied to individual modalities (Additional file 1: Fig. S54).

Fig. 3 Application of SMOPCA to a real spatial-CITE-seq data. a Tissue image of the analyzed human tonsil sample. b Clustering results of SMOPCA and different competing methods, with colors denoting the predicted cluster labels. c Moran's I score of different methods. d,e Top genes ( c ) and top proteins ( d ) identified by the differential expression analysis conducted on the predicted labels of SMOPCA. Heatmaps visually display the relative averaged expression levels across predicted clusters

<!-- image -->

The  tissue  image  and  spatial  clusters  derived  from  SMOPCA  exhibit  a  robust  correlation  between  anatomical  features  and  tissue/cell  types  (Fig.  3a,b).  Following  Liu et al. [27], we could approximately annotate the clusters obtained by SMOPCA as follows:  Cluster  0  corresponds  to  the  crypt  epithelia;  Cluster  6  indicates  specific  T  cell zones; Clusters 5 and 3 represent the germinal center (GC) dark and light zones; Clusters  1  and  2  are  localized  in  extrafollicular  regions;  and  Cluster  4  contains  peripheral blood cells in vasculature. We performed differential expression (DE) analyses for both genes and proteins to identify the top genes and proteins within each cluster reported by  SMOPCA (Fig.  3d,e).  Specifically,  significant  genes  and  proteins  (adjusted p -value &lt; 0.05)  were  detected  by  Seurat's  ' FindAllMarkers '  function  with  the  cluster  labels reported by SMOPCA. The top 10 most significant genes and proteins for each cluster were visualized in Fig. 3d,e. We observed that T cell markers, such as CD3, CD4, and CD49a [55], were upregulated in cluster 6, which indicated specific T cell zones [27]. CD21 [56] and CD23, found on mature B cells [27], along with IgM, whose expression is restricted to GC B cells [27], exhibit upregulation in cluster 3 and 5. CD90 (Thy- 1) is associated with a wide range of cell types (enriched in clusters 1 and 6) but completely absent in GCs (clusters 3 and 5). CD32 is an Fc receptor that regulates B cell activation [57] and was found mainly outside GCs [27] (only upregulated in cluster 0, 1, and 2). Mac2/Galectin3 is highly enriched in the crypt zone [27] (cluster 0). The identified differentially expressed protein markers, including markers associated with B cells and GC B cells (CD21, CD23, IgM, and IgD), markers enriched in the extracellular region (CD90 and Mac2), T cell markers (CD3, CD4, and CD45RA), and other related protein markers (CD32, CD9, and CD171), are visually presented in Additional file 1: Fig. S53. We conducted gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), following the differential gene expression analysis. The significant pathways (adjusted p -value &lt; 0.05) for the clusters identified by SMOPCA on the real spatial-CITE-seq dataset are shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S55.

## Application to Stereo-CITE-seq data

To  demonstrate  the  broad  applicability  of  SMOPCA  across  various  technology  platforms, we further applied it to analyze Stereo-CITE-seq [58] data. Liao et al. combined CITE-seq and Stereo-seq to develop the Stereo-CITE-seq [58] workflow, which could capture mRNA and protein expression with high spatial resolution, reproducibility, and accuracy. The Stereo-CITE-seq was used by Liao et al. to analyze a mouse thymus section (a small gland surrounded by a capsule of fibers and collagen) and obtain mRNA and protein measurements for each spot. Following Long et al. [42], we preprocessed the data and selected up to 2000 HVGs. The filtering process was applied only to mRNA data,  while  all  proteins  were  included.  Following  SpatialGlue,  we  tested  9  methods, including MEFISTO, SpaVAE, SpatialGlue, scMDC, TotalVI, Seurat, SpatialPCA, PCA + K-means, and SMOPCA, to obtain 8 clusters for this dataset [42]. The learned latent vectors for different methods were visualized in Additional file 1: Fig. S56.

SMOPCA, scMDC, MEFISTO, SpaVAE, and SpatialGlue all detected similar patterns, indicating  their  abilities  to  reveal  meaningful  biological  structure  and  provide  useful low dimensional representation for each spot. The detected patterns/clusters are corroborated  by  protein  marker  expression,  as  shown  in  Additional  file  1:  Fig.  S59.  Following Long et al., we could approximately annotate some detected clusters as follows:

0-Medulla,  1-Middle  cortex  region,  3-Connective  tissue  capsule,  5-Outer  cortex region,  6-Inner  cortex  region,  7-Connective  tissue  capsule  and  Subcapsular  zone. Additional file 1: Fig. S57-S58 display the Moran's I and LISI scores for different methods.  Overall,  SMOPCA  achieves  the  best  scores,  indicating  its  superior  performance in analyzing this Stereo-CITE-seq [58] data. We further conducted differential expression analysis based on cluster labels obtained by SMOPCA and identified differentially expressed  top  genes  (Fig.  4b)  and  top  protein  markers  (Fig.  4c,  Additional  file  1:  Fig. S59). Based on gene set enrichment analysis, the significant pathways (adjusted p -value &lt; 0.05) for the clusters identified by SMOPCA are presented in Additional file 1: Fig. S61. We also analyzed the effectiveness of each modality in clustering analysis and demonstrated that methods integrating information from multiple modalities could deliver better results as shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S60.

## Application to spatial ATAC and mRNA data

Microfluidic  indexing-based  spatial  assay  for  transposase-accessible  chromatin  and RNA-sequencing (MISAR-seq), proposed by Jiang et al., is a new sequencing method for spatially resolved joint profiling of chromatin accessibility and gene expression [28]. By applying MISAR-seq to the developing mouse brain, Jiang et al. [28] measured ATAC and mRNA counts in mouse embryonic brain across various regions (Additional file 1: Fig.  S62),  and  studied  tissue  organization and spatiotemporal regulatory logics during mouse  brain  development.  To  demonstrate  the  performance  of  SMOPCA  in  analyzing real spatial ATAC-seq data, we analyzed a MISAR-seq dataset of mouse embryonic (E15.5) brain [28] (Additional file 2: Table S1).

Fig. 4 Application of SMOPCA to a real Stereo-CITE-seq data. a Clustering results of SMOPCA and different competing methods, with colors denoting the predicted cluster labels. b , c Top genes ( b ) and top proteins ( c ) identified by the differential expression analysis conducted on the predicted labels of SMOPCA. Heatmaps visually display the relative averaged expression levels across predicted clusters

<!-- image -->

Figure 5 displays the results of SMOPCA along with other competing methods. Figure 5a and Fig. 5c visualize the ground-truth labels and predicted clusters generated by various  methods.  SMOPCA  and  SpatialPCA,  designed  to  capture  spatial  correlations among spots, yield notably smoother results (Additional file 1: Fig. S63-S64) compared to  other  competing  methods.  Additionally,  SMOPCA  consistently  delivers  the  best results across all three metrics, including AMI, NMI, and ARI (Fig. 5b). We visualize the latent embeddings of various methods in Fig. 5d, with ground-truth labels indicated by different colors. Overall, we observe that the latent representation of SMOPCA effectively separates different labels, whereas forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain tend to be entangled  in  the  embeddings  produced  by  other  methods  (e.g.,  chromVAR,  cisTopic, LSA, PeakVI, SCALE, scMDC, and Seurat). Note that SMOPCA also outperforms methods applied to each individual modality (Additional file 1: Fig. S66-S67).

While  SMOPCA  outperforms  other  methods,  there  are  still  some  mismatches between the ground-truth groups and the predicted clusters, particularly in the case of the forebrain region. Therefore, we apply the McFadden-adjusted pseudo R 2 value [59] to quantify the latent representation's capability to predict the true cell types. A higher pseudo R 2 value indicates a greater likelihood of accurately deriving true cell types from the latent representations. We presented the McFadden's pseudo R 2 value of all methods in Additional file 1: Fig. S65. As presented in Additional file 1: Fig. S65, SMOPCA stands  out  with  the  highest  pseudo R 2 value,  indicating  its  effectiveness  in  capturing and explaining the majority of the variance present in the MISAR-seq data. This finding emphasizes the superior capability of SMOPCA in extracting meaningful latent representations from the spatial bimodal ATAC-seq data.

We  also  applied  our  method  to  analyze  a  mouse  brain  dataset  obtained  through recently  developed  spatial  ATAC-RNA-seq,  a  spatially  resolved,  genome-wide  technique that co-maps the epigenome and transcriptome by simultaneous profiling of chromatin accessibility and mRNA expression. Following Zhang et al. [60] and Long et al. [42], we processed the data and clustered the spots into 18 clusters. As shown in Additional  file  1:  Fig.  S68-S71,  the  results  from  SMOPCA  aligned  well  with  the  annotated reference of the mouse brain coronal section from the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas. In addition, SMOPCA provided smoother results compared to all other competing methods, as evidenced by Moran's I and LISI scores.

## Application to single-cell multi-omics data

Although  the  motivation  of  the  development  of  SMOPCA  is  to  utilize  the  spatial information  to  improve  the  efficiency  and  interpretability  of  dimension  reduction and  spatial  domain  detection  based  on  multi-omics  data,  it  is  readily  applicable  to single-cell  multi-omics  data  with  the  pseudo-spatial  coordinates  generated  from other  dimension  reduction  techniques.  Thus,  it  effectively  borrows  the  strength from another dimension reduction method. It is worth noting that existing methods, including scvis [61] and scDHMap [62], have been introduced to preserve local clustering structures and capture underlying low-dimensional embeddings in scRNA-seq data through the application of t-SNE [63] regularizations. In the following applications, we show that by using the UMAP [44] coordinates, we improve the efficiency of the cell clustering, compared to the version of SMOPCA without using any coordinate information.

Fig. 5 Application of SMOPCA to a real MISAR-seq data. a Manually annotated labels of mouse embryonic (E15.5) brain tissues in the MISAR-seq dataset. b Clustering accuracy of SMOPCA and different competing methods, quantified by AMI, NMI, and ARI. c Clustering results of SMOPCA and different competing methods, with colors denoting the predicted cluster labels. d 2D UMAP visualization of latent representations learned by SMOPCA and different competing methods, with colors denoting manually annotated labels

<!-- image -->

In this section, we propose to generate the pseudo-spatial coordinates in a two-dimensional space from the data and then compute distance and covariance matrices. Specifically, the pseudo-spatial coordinates are achieved through the application of the UMAP [44] transformation to the top 2000 highly variable genes (CITE-seq data) or mapped genes (SMAGE-seq data) through Seurat package (as detailed in section 'UMAP location generation for real single-cell multi-omics data'). The computed cell pseudo-spatial coordinates, along with gene and protein/ATAC measurements, serve as inputs for fitting a SMOPCA model. As illustrated in Additional file 1: Fig. S1-S7 ('UMAP Coordinates'),  while  there  are  some  overlaps  between  different  cell  types,  the  calculated pseudo-coordinates consistently manifest a pattern where cells of the same type tend to  exhibit  smaller distances between them. In the subsequent paragraphs, we demonstrate that with the calculated spatial dependency information, the proposed SMOPCA can still effectively learn latent representations that preserve correlations and biological information for cells, resulting in improved clustering performance.

We  evaluate  the  clustering  performance  of  SMOPCA  on  the  real  CITE-seq  and SMAGE-seq datasets. The pseudo-spatial coordinates and low-dimensional representations learned by SpatialPCA and SMOPCA are visualized in Additional file 1: Fig. S1-S7 ('UMAP Coordinates' , 'SpatialPCA' , and 'SMOPCA'). Additional file 1: Fig. S32-S33 and Additional file 1: Fig. S34-S36,S39-S41 illustrate the clustering performance of SMOPCA and the competing methods on the real CITE-seq and SMAGE-seq datasets with UMAP coordinates. Note that methods, such as scMDC, Seurat, and PCA + K-means, do not use any cell location information, and their results align with those presented in simulation  studies.  When  compared  with  the  state-of-the-art  deep  learning-based  method scMDC, SMOPCA consistently yields superior or at least comparable results across all metrics and datasets, as shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S32-S33 and Additional file 1: Fig. S34-S36,S39-S41. Additionally, SMOPCA stands out by providing significantly better results than many other competing methods. The results, quantified by the averaged rank, are presented in Additional file 1: Fig. S37 and Additional file 1: Fig. S42.

We ran a special version of SMOPCA by explicitly setting the covariance matrix to a diagonal matrix. The results are shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S38 and Additional file 1: Fig. S43. It is interesting that, with diagonal covariance matrix, our method still delivers good results and actually outperforms many existing single-cell multi-omics methods in clustering analysis, which suggests that our method could be directly applied to singlecell  multi-omics data even without assuming any dependency among cells. Finally, we conducted  additional  studies  to  demonstrate  that  SMOPCA,  which  models  multiple modalities simultaneously, outperforms methods that operate on each modality individually (Additional file 1: Fig. S44 and Additional file 1: Fig. S45).

In summary, the proposed method can be applied to single-cell multi-omics datasets by directly computing a cell-to-cell distance matrix, constructed using domain knowledge, marker genes, or other relevant information, or by directly assigning a prior distribution with diagonal covariance matrix for the latent embeddings. Therefore, our model is  flexible  and  capable  of  incorporating  diverse  information  to  model  the  single-cell multi-omics data.

## Discussion

Our study presents SMOPCA, a novel dependency aware dimension reduction method that is tailored for spatial multi-omics data. SMOPCA explicitly integrates spatial location  information  into  the  learned  latent  factors,  preserving  neighborhood  similarity from the original data onto the low-dimensional manifold. Therefore, the low-dimensional  components  derived  from  SMOPCA  encapsulate  valuable  spatial  correlation information,  potentially  enhancing  the  capabilities  of  existing  tools  and  facilitating  a range  of  downstream  analyses  in  spatial  multi-omics  data  analysis.  In  this  paper,  our focus lies  in  the  joint  analysis  of  mRNA  alongside  protein  (spatial-CITE-seq  and  Stereo-CITE-seq) or ATAC data (MISAR-seq). It is worth noting that our method can be directly applied to analyze single-cell multi-omics data and is readily available to concurrently analyze more sources of data ( K &gt; 2 ). Our experimental results on real single-cell (CITE-seq and SMAGE-seq) and spatial multi-omics (spatial-CITE-seq, Stereo-CITEseq and MISAR-seq) data demonstrate that the proposed dependency-aware dimension reduction  approach  can  characterize  different  sources  of  data  and  model  correlations and dependencies among neighboring cells/spots effectively and efficiently, and could deliver better or at least comparable results compared with existing methods in dimension reduction and clustering analysis.

The  lengthscale/bandwidth  parameter  in  the  kernel  function  could  control  the smoothness  of  the  detected  spatial  patterns.  SMOPCA  and  SpatialPCA  differ  in  the ways to choose the lengthscale parameter. SpatialPCA applies heuristic methods (i.e., Silverman's  'rule-of-thumb'  bandwidth  [64]  for  large  datasets  and  non-parametric Sheather &amp; Jones's bandwidth [65] for small datasets) to compute the lengthscale hyperparameter for the kernel function and keeps it fixed during model training. Note that the heuristic methods do not use spatial location information to determine the bandwidth parameter. Consequently, given the same expression matrix, SpatialPCA will be trained with the same bandwidth hyperparameter, regardless of the cell locations. In contrast, SMOPCA, by default, automatically learns the lengthscale through the optimization of marginal likelihood [66]. However, when the data are very sparse and noisy, or the spatial structure is very complicated, it may be challenging to learn the appropriate lengthscale parameter. Therefore, SMOPCA also provides an option for users to specify the lengthscale. The users can tune the lengthscale to achieve the expected spatial clustering pattern based on prior knowledge.

In  this  study,  we  assume  that /Sigma1 1 = · · · = /Sigma1 d = /Sigma1 , meaning /Sigma1 l (for l = 1, . . . , d )  is calculated with the same kernel and length scale parameter. The same assumption is used in PPCA (probabilistic principal component analysis [67]), SpatialPCA [33], and SpaVAE [40].  This  assumption  is  imposed  to  facilitate  computation,  as  there  exists closed-form solution for Wk .  When this assumption is relaxed, allowing each latent dimension to have its own length scale parameter, the theoretical properties remain valid. However, unlike the case where the covariance is shared, no closed-form solution for ̂ Wk can be found. When the covariance functions are different, the maximum marginal  likelihood  estimation  of  the  matrices Wk is  equivalent  to  an  optimization problem with orthogonal constraints W T k Wk = Id ,  often referred as the Stiefel manifold [68, 69]. A numerical optimization algorithm that preserves the orthogonal constraints may be introduced to solve the problem [68]. We will explore this option in our future work.

Different  kernel  functions  can  be  employed  by  our  model  for  capturing  spatial dependencies. However, SMOPCA does not appear to be very sensitive to the choice of kernel functions and parameters (Additional file 1: Fig. S22, Additional file 1: Fig. S23 and Additional file 1: Fig. S49). For numerical stability, SMOPCA defaults to the Matern kernel (with ν = 3 / 2 ), while users also have the flexibility to opt for other kernels (e.g., Cauchy kernel or Gaussian kernel) or other parameters (e.g., ν = 5 / 2 also achieves good results, as shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S24 and Additional file 1: Fig. S25). The Matern kernel is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with positive parameters ν and γ , where d ( · , · ) is the Euclidean distance, K ν ( · ) is a modified Bessel function and /Gamma1 ( · ) is  the gamma function. The Matern kernel encompasses a  wide  range  of  different  kernel  functions,  named  the  Matern  class  after  the  work  of Matern [70]. Particularly,  with ν = 1 / 2 ,  the  Matern  kernel  becomes  equivalent  to  the exponential  kernel,  and  with ν →+∞ ,  it  is  equivalent  to  Gaussian  kernel.  The  flexibility of the Matern kernel makes it widely applicable for modeling spatially correlated data [71]. Note that the Matern covariance function becomes especially simple and has a closed-form expression as a product of an exponential and a polynomial of order p , when ν is  half-integer: ν = p + 1 / 2 , where p is  a  non-negative  integer.  As  mentioned by  Rasmussen  et  al.  [66], ν = 3 / 2 and ν = 5 / 2 may  be  the  most  interesting  cases  for machine learning. When ν = 1 / 2 , the process becomes very rough [66], and for ν ≥ 7 / 2 , in the absence of explicit prior knowledge about the existence of higher order derivatives, it is probably very hard from finite noisy training examples to distinguish between values of ν ≥ 7 / 2 .

Due to the eigen decomposition, the time complexity and space complexity of our current implementation are O ( n 3 ) and O ( n 2 ) ,  respectively, where n is  the number of cells/spots in the process. Note that this is similar to SpatialPCA. Additional file 3: Table S2 lists the running time of different methods on different datasets. As shown in Additional file 3: Table S2, SMOPCA is much faster than many existing methods. Matern kernels, with ν = ( 2 p + 1 )/ 2 for  all p ∈ N ,  are  of  the  desired  rational  function form as analyzed by Jouni Hartikainen and Simo Särkkä [72], and the marginal likelihood of this model can be reformulated as a product of the multivariate normal distributions, which may potentially be solved exactly with classical Kalman filtering theory [72, 73]. In our future work, we aim to further optimize the multi-omics model to reduce both time and space complexity.

Similar to Seurat [37] (e.g., https://  satij  alab.  org/  seurat/  artic  les/  pbmc3k\_  tutor  ial), PCA, and SpatialPCA [33], our method utilizes normalized data, rather than raw expression measurements, as inputs for dimension reduction analysis. Due to various technical  limitations,  current  spatial  multi-omics data often contain a significant number of dropout events, leading to excessive zeros in the expression matrix [74]. Therefore, our method may be suboptimal, as it does not consider the dropout events and the inherent mean-variance relationship presents in raw counts, potentially resulting in a loss of inference accuracy and subsequent reduction in analytical power. Similar power losses have been extensively documented in prior studies [53, 75-78] for methods exclusively analyzing  normalized  data.  One  possible  extension  of  our  model  is  to  assume  zeroinflated models such as zero-inflated Gaussian distribution [74] for the normalized data or zero-inflated negative binomial distribution [40] for raw count data. Direct modeling of  count  data  through  deep-learning-based  models,  such  as  auto-encoder  and  variational auto-encoder models, is also possible, similar to our previously developed spatial deep generative model, SpaVAE [40], which directly analyzes raw count data and models spatial dependencies of neighboring spots through a Gaussian process (GP) prior [79]. As additional layers of complexity are introduced, the computation required for these models may increase significantly. Therefore, developing computationally efficient methods that account for the count sampling process represents an important direction for future research.

## Conclusions

SMOPCA serves as a powerful and flexible framework for dependency-aware dimension reduction  in  spatial  multi-omics  analysis.  By  explicitly  incorporating  spatial  location information, SMOPCA preserves neighborhood similarity in the latent space and effectively captures spatial correlations across multiple omics layers. Extensive experiments on both single-cell and spatial multi-omics datasets demonstrate that SMOPCA delivers competitive or superior performance compared to existing approaches, with enhanced efficiency  and  robustness,  laying  a  solid  foundation  for  advancing  spatial  multi-omics data analysis.

## Methods

## SMOPCA overview

We consider a spatial multi-omics dataset consisting of different types of measurements for n spatial locations ( n spots or cells) of a tissue. These spots have known spatial coordinates that are recorded during the experiment. We denote si as the spatial coordinates for spot i , with i ∈ { 1, · · · , n } . Depending on the technology, the spatial coordinates may vary continuously over a two-dimensional space ( si = ( si 1, si 2 ) ∈ R 2 )  or  a  three-dimensional space ( si = ( si 1, si 2, si 3 ) ∈ R 3 ).  Let's  denote k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } as  the  modality  of  the data. We denote Yk as the mk × n measurement matrix of the k th modality in the study. The ji th value of Yk , Ykji represents the k th modality measurement for j th feature (e.g., gene  or  protein)  on i th  location.  Following  previous  studies  [33,  80-82],  we  assume that the measurements have already been normalized (see ' Data preprocessing'). Our objective is to conduct dimension reduction on the measurement matrices and learn a joint d × n factor matrix, denoted as Z ,  representing the low-dimensional embeddings of spots. The factor matrix Z contains d factors, and its l th  row, Zl ,  is  a n -vector that represents the l th factor values across n spots. Mathematically, we consider the following model

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where k ∈ { 1, . . . , K } represents  the  modality  index; Wk is  a mk × d factor  loading matrix; and Ek is a mk × n matrix of residual errors. Following GPPCA [39] and Shang et al. [33], we assume that the ji -th element of Ek , Ekji ,  follows an independent normal distribution with mean zero and variance σ 2 k ,  namely Ekji ∼ N ( 0, σ 2 k ) .  As  shown in Eq. (1), different modalities of data share the same latent factor matrix Z in SMOPCA, indicating the inferred posterior of latent factors will integrate information from multiple modalities.

The factor model (1) is not identifiable, as for any invertible matrix /Lambda1 k , if Wk , Z is the solution, Wk /Lambda1 , /Lambda1 -1 Z is also a solution. Following the probabilistic principal component analysis model (PPCA [67]), we further place constraints on Wk and Z to ensure model identifiability. We assume that the loading matrix Wk satisfies the orthonormality constraint  or W ⊤ k Wk = Id . Under this assumption, we derived a closed-form solution for the maximum marginal likelihood estimation of the factor loading matrix Wk when the covariance function of the factor processes is  shared.  Existing  factor  analysis  models, such as MOFA [35] and its spatial version MEFISTO [43], were formulated in a probabilistic Bayesian framework and prior distributions were placed on all unobserved variables of the model (i.e., the factors Z and the weight matrices Wk ). The key determinant of the MOFA and MEFISTO is the two-level sparsity regularizations applied on the weights Wk .  Specifically, an Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD) prior [83] and a spikeand-slab prior [84] were combined together to ensure model identifiability and achieve factor-wise  sparsity  and  feature-wise  sparsity  [35,  43,  69]  for Z and Wk ,  respectively. Compared to MOFA and MEFISTO, the closed-form marginal likelihood obtained in this work is more computationally efficient and feasible [67].

To explicitly model spatial information and encourage neighborhood similarity in factor values [39], we assume that each Zl follows a multivariate normal distribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where /Sigma1 l is a n × n covariance matrix that models the correlation among spatial locations.  We  assume  that  spatially  proximate  spots  are  more  likely  to  exhibit  biological similarity, resulting in a relatively larger value at the corresponding entry of the covariance matrix. Here, we construct the covariance matrix by employing a kernel function defined  over  spatial  coordinates.  Specifically,  the ij th  element  of /Sigma1 l is  in  the  form  of k γ ( si , sj ) , with k γ ( si , sj ) being the kernel function.

Different  kernel  functions  can  be  employed  by  our  model  for  capturing  the  spatial dependencies. Three kernel functions have been considered (Additional file 5: Supplementary Note 2), and their effects are displayed in Additional file 1: Fig. S22-S25 and Additional file 1: Fig. S49. As shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S22-S25 and Additional file 1: Fig. S49, SMOPCA does not appear to be very sensitive to the choice of these kernels. For numerical stability, by default, we choose the Matern kernel with ν = 3 / 2 . The Matern kernel with ν = 3 / 2 between spots i and j is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where si and sj are spatial locations of spot i and j ; γ is the length scale parameter. The strength of spatial correlation is jointly determined by both the distance between spots and the length scale parameter. On the one hand, for the same distance measure, a small γ leads to a weak spatial correlation, while a large γ

leads to a strong spatial correlation [85, 86]. On the other hand, given the parameter γ , if two locations are close to each other, then the corresponding element in covariance matrix will be large, leading to similar factor values on the two locations; and vice versa.

## Inference

SMOPCA uses a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) framework to estimate the parameters and latent variables including γ , σ 1, . . . , σ K , W 1, . . . , WK and Z .  The modality-specific  parameters σ k , Wk are  updated  iteratively  within  each  modality,  while  the modality-shared parameter γ is updated across modalities. Specifically, we first marginalize out Z to obtain the marginal likelihood of modality k .  We then iteratively perform the MLE on the marginal likelihoods to obtain estimates of Wk and σ 2 k .  In some scenarios, users may have the desire to balance the contribution of each modality and reduce the  influence  of  some  modalities  on  the  parameter  estimates.  One  possible  solution is  to  impose  modality-dependent weights to the log likelihood function of Y 1, . . . , YK . Without loss of generality, we assume there is a positive weight α k , k = 1, . . . , K , for the k th  modality. Following popular methods, including SpatialPCA, SpaVAE, SpatialGlue, TotalVI, scMDC and many others, by default, we set α k = 1 for  each  modality.  However, our implementation is quite flexible and allows users to explore and specify predefined modality-dependent weights based on their needs and prior knowledge. Given { α 1 , α 2.., α K } , we use the weighted joint likelihood of Y 1, . . . , YK to update γ . Lastly, with the weighted joint likelihood of Y 1, . . . , YK , Z and the parameter estimates, the posterior mean of Z is  computed as the integrated low-dimensional representation of the input data. Note, in the algorithm, we perform eigen decomposition on the kernel matrix /Sigma1 to enable scalable computation (Additional file 5: Supplementary Note 3).

Specifically, denote θ = { γ , W 1, . . . , Wk , σ 2 1 , . . . σ 2 K } and θ k = { Wk , σ 2 k } , k = 1, . . . , K . According to the prior of residual error Ekji ∼ N ( 0, σ 2 k ) , i = 1, . . . , n , j = 1, . . . , mk , k = 1, . . . , K ,  and  the  dependency  relationship between latent variables, we can derive the conditional distribution Yk in Lemma 1 .

Lemma 1 . For model (1), the marginal distribution of Yk conditional on Z is as follows, for k = 1, . . . , K ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume /Sigma1 1 = · · · = /Sigma1 d = /Sigma1 .  Based  on Lemma 1, we can obtain the maximum marginal  likelihood  estimation  of Wk and σ 2 k iteratively,  denoted  as ̂ Wk and ̂ σ 2 k ,  and  the weighted maximum joint likelihood estimation of γ , denoted as γ .

̂ Based on conditional marginal distribution of Yk in formula (4) and the multivariate  normal  distribution  of Z in  formula  (2),  we  can  derive  the  weighted  posterior distribution for each Zl , l = 1, . . . , d .  The  posterior  expectation  for  each Zl can  be the final low-dimensional representation as shown in Theorem 1 below.

Theorem 1 For model (1), we can obtain the multivariate normal distribution of each Zl , l = 1, . . . , d

where A = 1 2 ( ∑ K k = 1 α k σ 2 k In + /Sigma1 -1 ) , bl = ∑ K k = 1 α k σ 2 k Y ⊤ k wkl .  Further,  plugging  the  estimators { ̂ γ , ̂ σ 2 1 , . . . , ̂ σ 2 K ; ̂ W 1, . . . , ̂ WK } into  equation  ( 5 ),  we  can  obtain  the  maximum likelihood estimation for each Zl , l = 1, . . . , d ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Corollary  1 Suppose  that  dimension  reduction  is  performed  on  each  modality k separately. For k = 1, . . . , K , l = 1, . . . , d ,  we can obtain the multivariate normal distribution of each Zkl on single modality k of data as.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

When  modality  weight α k ≥ 1 ,  with  some  derivations,  we  show  that  the  latent factors  learned  by  SMOPCA, which integrates information from multimodal data, yields  lower  uncertainty  compared  to  conducting  dimension  reduction  on  each modality of data, separately. The detailed derivation of equation ( 4 -7 ), the parameter inference algorithm [66, 87, 88] and the stability analysis of SMOPCA can be found in Additional file 5: Supplementary Note 3.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Model implementation

SMOPCA is implemented in Python 3 (version 3.10.0)  using  scanpy  [89]  (version 1.9.1), numpy [90] (version 1.23.5), scipy [91] (version 1.10.0), and scikit-learn [92] (version 1.2.1). SMOPCA involves two hyperparameters: the dimensionality d of the latent vector and the γ parameter, which acts as the length scale of the kernel. For the number of PCs d ,  existing popular works, such as SpaVAE [40] (default d = 20 ), SpatialPCA (default 10 PCs), BayesSpace [32] (default 15 PCs), SpaGCN [31] (default 50 PCs), and PCA + K-means (from Seurat package; default 50 PCs), all use default values. In SMOPCA, the dimension of the latent space d is set to 20 by default, if the user does not specify a value for this parameter. We conducted a sensitivity analysis for the choice of d .  Additional file 1: Fig. S26 and Additional file 1: Fig. S27 demonstrate that SMOPCA is robust to the number of spatial PCs. By default, the length scale parameter γ is learned automatically in the training process. K -means clustering ('sklearn.cluster.KMeans') is performed on the low-dimensional vectors to predict the final clustering labels for SMOPCA.

## Data preprocessing

In  accordance  with  Lin  et  al.  [25],  we  preprocessed  and  normalized  the  data  from each  modality  separately.  Initially,  genes  and  proteins  with  zero  counts  were  filtered  out.  Subsequently,  the  count  matrix  was  normalized  by  library  size  (the  total read  count),  followed  by  log  transformation  and  scaling  to  achieve  zero  mean  and unit variance. This library size-based normalization method has been used in other algorithms, such as SPARK [53] and BOOST-MI [93], and proved to be effective in practice (Additional file 5: Supplementary Note 4 and Additional file 1: Fig. S28-S29). Following  scMDC [25], we mapped ATAC reads to gene regions and collapsed the peak  matrix  into  a  gene  activity  matrix,  adhering  to  the  established  protocol  from the Satija  lab.  The  gene  activity  matrix  was  preprocessed  and  normalized using the same method as applied to mRNA data. Following Tian et al. [40], we utilized SPARK [53] to filter genes, retaining a set of spatially variable genes (SVG) for the analysis of spatial-CITE-seq, MISAR-seq, and spatial ATAC-RNA-seq data. Gene significance is assessed  using  a  False  Discovery  Rate  (FDR)  threshold  of  0.05,  applying  the  Benjamini-Yekutieli (BY) procedure, which is effective under arbitrary dependence across genes [94].

## Data simulation

## Simulation setting I: simulate spatial information for real single-cell multi-omics data

In  simulation studies, we assume that cells from the same cluster are close to each other and different cell types exhibit layer-wise patterns, as inspired by the six-layered human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) datasets [50]. Given a single-cell multi-omics  dataset  with n cells,  we  assign  the  cells  to  a  simulated  2D  grid  represented by { 1, 2, . . . , m } × { 1, 2, . . . , m } ,  where m = ⌈ √ n ⌉ is  the smallest integer greater than or equal to √ n .  Initially,  we  rearrange  the  cells  by  randomly  ordering  the  cell types.  Subsequently, within each cell type, we randomly permutate the cells. Afterwards, we allocate the cells to the grid locations row by row and column by column, following the order:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ⌊ n m ⌋ is  the largest integer less than or equal to n m .  It  is  worth noting that the simulated  coordinates  have  the  flexibility  to  undergo  transformation  or  rotation, resulting in a distinct set of locations. To ensure a thorough comparison, we randomly generate 10 simulated locations for each real dataset and then evaluate the clustering performance for each simulated dataset.

## Simulation setting II: simulate multi-omics data with three modalities based on real SRT data

Due to a lack of available data, simulations and real data analyses in current singlecell multi-omics and spatial multi-omics methodology research (e.g., TotalVI, MOFA, scMDC, MEFISTO, SpaVAE, SpatialGlue, and others) has primarily focused on two omics  datatypes.  Here,  we  simulated  datasets  with  3  omics  modalities  to  demonstrate the capability of SMOPCA in analyzing multi-omics data with more than two modalities. SRTsim [52], developed by Zhu et al. in 2023, is an SRT-specific simulator  for  scalable,  reproducible,  and  realistic  SRT  simulations.  We  employed  SRTsim to  generate simulated data, which not only maintains various expression characteristics of the SRT data but also preserves spatial patterns. We used the LIBD human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) dataset [50], which includes 12 tissue sections spanning six neuronal layers and the white matter from three human brains, as a reference for tissue-wise model fitting and data simulation. For each section, we simulated three count matrices from three omics modalities with different random seeds.

## UMAP location generation for real single-cell multi-omics data

In order to analyze real single-cell multi-omics datasets, we generated a 2D UMAP [44] coordinates by the Seurat [37] package. We normalized the gene expression matrix and selected the top 2000 highly variable genes (CITE-seq data) or mapped genes (SMAGE-seq data) as input features for the principal component analysis (PCA) analysis. In accordance with the online Seurat tutorial, we utilized the top 50 principal components (PCs) for conducting UMAP analysis.

## Evaluation metrics

The  clustering  performance  is  assessed  using  three  metrics:  Adjusted  Rand  Index  [95] (ARI), Normalized Mutual Information [96] (NMI), and Adjusted Mutual Information [97] (AMI). These metrics gauge the concordance between predicted labels and the groundtruth labels. When the ground-truth labels were unavailable, we introduced Moran's I score and local  inverse  Simpson's  index  (LISI)  score  [54]  to  quantitatively  measure  the  spatial smoothness of the identified spatial domains. Additionally, following Shang et al. [33], we employed the McFadden-adjusted pseudo R 2 [59] to evaluate the predictive ability of the learned latent representations from each method in predicting the true spatial domains.

Given two cluster assignments U and V , we define a , the number of pairs of two objects in the same group in both U and V ; b , the number of pairs of two objects in different groups in both U and V ; c , the number of pairs of two objects in the same group in U but in different groups in V ; and d, the number of pairs of two objects in different groups in U but in the same group in V . The ARI is formally defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let U = { U 1, U 2, . . . , UCU } and V = { V 1, V 2, . . . , VCV } ,  which  are  two  cluster  assignments on a set of n data points and have CU and CV clusters, respectively. NMI is defined as the mutual information between U and V divided by the entropy of U and V . Specifically,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, AMI is defined as

where I ( U , V ) = ∑ CU p = 1 ∑ CV q = 1 ∣ ∣ Up ∩ Vq ∣ ∣ log n | Up ∩ Vq | | Up | × | Vq | represents  the  mutual  information between U and V ; H ( U ) = -∑ CU p = 1 ∣ ∣ Up ∣ ∣ log | Up | n and H ( V ) = -∑ CV q = 1 ∣ ∣ Vq ∣ ∣ log | Vq | n are the entropies.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  extra  component E { I ( U , V ) } is  the  expected  mutual  information  between  two random clusters [97]. Note that ARI, NMI, and AMI will equal 1 when the two cluster assignments are identical, and smaller than one when the two cluster assignments differ in their pairing. The AMI, NMI, and ARI metrics are calculated with scikit-learn [92] functions  (i.e.,  ' sklearn.metrics.adjusted\_mutual\_info\_score ' ,  ' sklearn.metrics.normal-ized\_mutual\_info\_score ' , and ' sklearn.metrics.adjusted\_rand\_score ').

Moran's I score is a metric used to assess the global spatial autocorrelation of gene expression  levels.  Let x represent  a  gene's  expression  level.  Moran's  I  score  is  then defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where xi and xj are the gene expressions at spot i and j , x is the average expression of the gene, N is the number of spots, wij is spatial weight between spot i and j , and W = ∑ wij . We calculate wij by k -nearest neighbors using spatial coordinates and k is  set to 5. The Moran's I score is calculated by 'squidpy.gr.spatial\_autocorr' from the Squidpy (Spatial Single Cell Analysis in Python) package [98].

The LISI score reflects the effective number of different categories (e.g., clusters) represented in the local neighborhood of each cell/spot and is computed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p ( c ) is the probability that the cluster label c is in the local neighborhood, and C ′ is the total number of spatial domains. A smaller LISI score suggests that the cells are less mixed. The LISI score is calculated using the ' compute\_lisi ' function from the LISI [54] R package with default parameters.

We also evaluated the information embedded in the outputs of diverse methods used for predicting true spatial domains. To conduct this assessment, we treated the true spatial  domains  as  the  outcome  and  employed  a  multinomial  regression  model,  with  the extracted  low-dimensional  components  serving  as  predictors.  Subsequently,  we  calculated  the  McFadden-adjusted  pseudo R 2 to  evaluate  the  predictive  performance  of these  variables  in  predicting  the  ground  truth  [59].  A  higher  pseudo R 2 suggests  that the method is capable of extracting informative latent representations for predicting the true spatial domains. The pseudo R 2 Statistics is calculated using the ' PseudoR2 ' function from the DescTools [99] R package.

## Public real datasets

Multiple CITE-seq datasets are employed in our experiments, encompassing the Peripheral  Blood  Mononuclear  Cells  (PBMC)  dataset  and  a  series  of  Mouse  Spleen  Lymph Node  datasets  (SLN111D1,  SLN111D2,  SLN208D1,  and  SLN208D2).  CITE-seq  was developed based on the scRNA-seq technology to profile mRNA expression and quantify surface protein simultaneously at the cellular level [20, 21, 25]. Specifically, CITE-seq enables  the  counting  of  Antibody-Derived  Tags  (ADT)  to  measure  the  protein  abundance. Each cell, labeled with ADTs and DNA-barcoded microbeads, is encapsulated in a droplet for single-cell sequencing [26]. The PBMC dataset was obtained from the 10X Genomics website (https://  suppo  rt.  10xge  nomics.  com/  single-  cell-  gene-  expre  ssion/  datas ets),  and  cellular  type  annotations  were  provided by Specter [38] (https://  github.  com/ canza  rlab/  Spect  er).

As shown in Additional file 2: Table S1, there are 3762 cells, 33,538 genes, and 49 proteins in the downloaded PBMC dataset. The mouse spleen lymph node datasets, along with cell type annotations, were downloaded from the TotalVI [34] Github repository (https://  github.  com/  Yosef  Lab/  total  VI\_  repro  ducib  ility).  As  shown  in  Additional  file  2: Table S1, the SLN111D1, SLN111D2, SLN208D1, and SLN208D2 datasets contain 8853, 6949, 8371, and 6678 cells, respectively. The SLN111D1 and SLN111D2 datasets each measured 13,553 genes and 110 proteins, while the SLN208D1 and SLN208D2 datasets measured 13,553 genes and 207 proteins.

The  10X  Single-Cell  Multiome  ATAC + Gene  Expression  (SMAGE-seq  [22,  23]) datasets  (PBMC3K  and  PBMC10K)  are  accessible  from  the  10X  Genomics  resource center (https://  www.  10xge  nomics.  com/  resou  rces/  datas  ets). In SMAGE-seq, singlecell  ATAC-seq  data  provides  chromatin  accessibility  information  that  complements single-cell mRNA-seq data. By learning a joint embedding of both modalities, we can achieve higher-resolution cell types. Both datasets are derived from human peripheral blood  mononuclear  cells  (PBMCs),  comprising  approximately  3000  and  10,000  cells, referred to as PBMC3K and PBMC10K, respectively. The detailed information is given in Additional file 2: Table S1. For SMAGE-seq datasets, mRNA counts are directly downloaded online, while ATAC gene counts are derived from the raw data using the procedure employed in scMDC [25]. This involves filtering reads based on ATAC peak region fragments, nucleosome signals, and Transcription Start Site (TSS) enrichment. Subsequently, each read is mapped to a gene region using the" GeneActivity "function in Signac [100] (v1.4.0), following the established protocol proposed by the Satija lab. PBMC cells are annotated using the label transfer method in Seurat [37], utilizing the reference dataset 'pbmc\_10k\_v3.rds' (https://  www.  dropb  ox.  com/s/  zn6kh  irjaf  oyyxl/  pbmc\_  10k\_ v3.  rds?  dl = 0), as provided by the Satija lab. After preprocessing, the ATAC data, which is mapped to the gene regions, is processed in the same way as for the mRNA data.

The  LIBD  human  dorsolateral  prefrontal  cortex  (DLPFC)  datasets  [50]  were  downloaded  from  http://  spati  al.  libd.  org/  spati  alLIBD/.  The  10 × Genomics  Visium  platform was used by Maynard et al. in 2021 to obtain the DLPFC data and define the spatial topography of gene expression in the six-layered human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. There are 12 sections/datasets (with section number 151507, 151,508, 151,509, 151,510, 151,669,  151,670,  151,671,  151,672,  151,673,  151,674,  151,675,  and  151,676)  in  the DLPFC data.

The  12  sections  contain  3000-4000  spots  that  span  six  neural  layers  and  the  white matter. The layers were manually annotated by the original authors. We selected 5000 HVGs for each section and used the filtered gene expression matrix as input for SRTsim to generate simulated 3-omics datasets.

The spatial-CITE-seq data [27] can be downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (https://  www.  ncbi.  nlm.  nih.  gov/  geo/  query/  acc.  cgi?  acc = GSE21  3264). In 2023, Liu et al. [27]

extended co-indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes (CITE) into the spatial dimension and developed the spatial co-indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes for multi-omics mapping by highly parallel sequencing (spatial-CITE-seq). This technique uses a cocktail of approximately 200-300 ADTs to stain a tissue slide, followed by deterministic in-tissue barcoding of both antibody-derived DNA tags and mRNAs, enabling spatially resolved, high-plex protein, and transcriptome co-profiling. They profiled &gt; 200 proteins and the whole transcriptome in human tissues, revealing spatially distinct germinal center reactions in tonsil. Here, we used human tonsil sample for the analysis, which contains 2491 spots with 28,417 genes and 283 proteins. Following SpaVAE, the mRNA counts were filtered by SPARK [53] with the default settings, resulting in 959 retained spatially variable genes.

The  Stereo-CITE-seq  mouse  thymus  dataset  [58]  was  downloaded  from  https:// zenodo.  org/  recor  ds/  10362  607. Liao et al. combined CITE-seq and Stereo-seq to develop the Stereo-CITE-seq technology, and studied the murine thymus tissue samples by codetection of mRNAs and protein markers. There are 4 sections in the dataset, and for our study, we used the first section, which had 4697 spots, 23,622 genes and 51 protein markers. Following SpatialGlue, the mRNA counts were filtered by Seurat to select 2000 highly variable genes.

The  microfluidic  indexing-based  spatial  ATAC  and  RNA  sequencing  (MISAR-seq [28]) data, which profiled the mouse embryonic E15.5 brain, could be downloaded from https://  doi.  org/  10.  5281/  zenodo.  74800  69. Manually annotated labels were obtained based on Allen Mouse Brain Atlas [101] and H&amp;E image (Additional file 1: Fig. S62). MISAR-seq, introduced by Jiang et al. in 2023, is a spatially resolved method for joint profiling  of  chromatin  accessibility  and  gene  expression  [28].  It  was  first  applied  to study consecutive developmental stages of the mouse brain, and revealed the dynamic spatiotemporal  regulatory  mechanisms  involved  in  establishing  the  brain's  complex architecture, owing to the high-quality transcriptome-open chromatin status in the different anatomical brain regions. We exactly follow the pipeline provided by the author of MISAR-seq to preprocess and filter the data. After preprocessing, 1949 out of the initial 2500 spots were retained. ArchR calls macs2 [102] (2.2.7.1) to detect the peak regions, subsequently computing counts for each peak per cell. The raw peak matrix contains 105,350 peaks across 1949 spots. We then use the ' FindTopFeatures ' function in Signac [100] (v1.4.0) to select the peaks that are at least detected in 200 cells for the analysis. 47,287 out of 105,350 peaks passed the filtering criteria. The peaks are further mapped to gene regions using the " GeneActivity " function in Signac [100] (v1.4.0), following the established protocol proposed by the Satija lab. Following SpaVAE, 2144 spatially variable genes and 3000 spatially variable mapped genes were selected by SPARK [53] with the default parameters.

The spatial ATAC-RNA-seq mouse brain data [60] was downloaded from https://  zenodo. org/  recor  ds/  10362  607.  Zhang  et  al.  [60]  presented  two  technologies  (i.e.,  spatial  ATACRNA-seq and spatial CUT&amp;Tag-RNA-seq) for spatially resolved, genome-wide, joint profiling  of  the  epigenome,  and  transcriptome  on  the  same  tissue  section  at  near-single-cell resolution.  The  developed  spatial  ATAC-RNA-seq  was  applied  to  analyze  juvenile  (P22) mouse brain coronal sections for joint profiling of chromatin accessibility with transcriptome. The downloaded dataset contains 9215 cells, 22,914 genes, and 121,068 peaks. The peaks were mapped to gene regions using the" GeneActivity "function in Signac [100] (v1.4.0), following the established protocol proposed by the Satija lab. Following existing works [40, 42], 2420 spatially variable genes and 3000 spatially variable mapped genes were selected by SPARK [53] with the default parameters.

## Competing methods

The following state-of-the-art tools are employed as competing methods for the analysis of protein data: BREM-SC (https://  github.  com/  tarot  0410/  BREMSC), CiteFuse (https:// github.  com/  Sydne  yBioX/  CiteF  use), SC3 (https://  github.  com/  hembe  rg-  lab/  SC3), scMDC (https://  github.  com/  xiang  lin226/  scMDC),  Seurat  (https://  github.  com/  satij  alab/  seurat), TotalVI  (https://  scvi-  tools.  org),  Tscan  (https://  github.  com/  zji90/  TSCAN),  MEFISTO (https://  biofam.  github.  io/  MOFA2/  MEFIS  TO), SpaVAE (https://  github.  com/  ttgump/ spaVAE/)  and  SpatialGlue  (https://  spati  alglue-  tutor  ials.  readt  hedocs.  io/  en/  latest/  index. html). In the context of ATAC data analysis, the utilized methodologies include chromVAR (https://  github.  com/  Green  leafL  ab/  chrom  VAR), cisTopic (https://  github.  com/ aerts  lab/  cisTo  pic),  LSA  (implemented  by  scikit-learn),  PeakVI  (https://  scvi-  tools.  org), SCALE  (https://  github.  com/  jsxlei/  SCALE), scMDC  (https://  github.  com/  xiang  lin226/ scMDC), Seurat (https://  github.  com/  satij  alab/  seurat), MEFISTO (https://  biofam.  github. io/  MOFA2/  MEFIS  TO), SpaVAE (https://  github.  com/  ttgump/  spaVAE/), and SpatialGlue (https://  spati  alglue-  tutor  ials.  readt  hedocs.  io/  en/  latest/  index.  html).  MEFISTO,  SpaVAE, and SpatialGlue were recently developed to model spatial correlations among neighboring  spots  in  the  spatial  datasets.  Furthermore,  SpatialPCA  (https://  github.  com/  shang ll123/  Spati  alPCA) and PCA + K-means have been introduced as additional competing methods for comprehensive comparisons across all analyses. Methods that model multimodal data, such as BREM-SC, CiteFuse, Seurat, scMDC, MEFISTO, SpaVAE, and SpatialGlue utilize mRNA data in conjunction with either protein or ATAC data as inputs. Conversely,  methods  built  upon  ATAC  data,  including  PeakVI,  SCALE,  and  cisTopic, use ATAC data as their primary input. For ATAC data, we utilize a cell-to-gene matrix as input for scMDC, Seurat, MEFISTO, SpatialGlue, SMOPCA, SpatialPCA, and PCA + K-means. This matrix is constructed by mapping ATAC reads onto the gene regions. Seurat, originally designed for CITE-seq data, is adapted in this context by applying the weighted-nearest  neighbor  (WNN)  algorithm  to  the  SMAGE-seq  data.  For  all  other methods, such as SpatialPCA and PCA + K-means, different types of data are pre-processed and normalized separately and then concatenated into a unified input. We follow the tutorials provided by the original authors to preprocess data, configure model parameters, and conduct experiments for the competing methods, including BREM-SC, CiteFuse,  SC3,  scMDC,  Seurat,  Tscan,  PeakVI,  SCALE,  cisTopic,  MEFISTO,  SpaVAE, SpatialGlue, and SpatialPCA. To maintain consistency, all methods utilize identical sets of genes/features in both RNA and ATAC data, and they incorporate all proteins in the CITE-seq  or  spatial-CITE-seq  dataset.  When  normalization  is  necessary,  we  adhere to  the  normalization  method  outlined  in  scMDC  [25].  Note  that K -means  clustering (implemented  using  'sklearn.cluster.KMeans')  is  performed  on  the  low-dimensional representations learned by dimension reduction methods, such as SMOPCA, TotalVI, SpaVAE, SpatialPCA, and PCA, to derive the final cell type results.

## Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at https://  doi.  org/  10.  1186/  s13059-  025-  03576-9.

Additional file 1: Fig. S1-S71.

Additional file 2: Table S1.

Additional file 3: Table S2.

Additional file 4: Table S3.

Additional file 5: Supplementary Note 1-4.

Additional file 6: Review history.

## Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. Xiang Lin from New Jersey Institute of Technology for providing detailed information about data preprocessing procedures used in scMDC.

## Review history

The review history is available as Additional File 6.

## Peer review information

Veronique van den Berghe and Kevin Pang were the primary editors of this article and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the editorial team.

## Authors' contributions

M.C., R.C. and J.Z. designed the method. M.C., R.C., J.H., and J.Z. conducted experiments. R.C., M.C., and J.Z. derived the theoretical properties. J.C. and J.Z. supervised the study. M.C., R.C., J.H., J.C., and J.Z. wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding

J.Z. is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (grant no. BK20230781) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 62306134). R.C. is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 72371186). The work was also supported by Mayo Clinic Center for Individualized Medicine (J.C.).

## Data availability

The data that support the findings of this study are publicly available online. Preprocessed genomics datasets can be found at Zenodo: https://  doi.  org/  10.  5281/  zenodo.  15187  362 [103]. PBMC dataset is available on 10X Genomics website (https://  suppo  rt.  10xge  nomics.  com/  single-  cell-  gene-  expre  ssion/  datas  ets) and the cell type labels can be downloaded from the Github of Specter (https://  github.  com/ canzarlab/Specter). The mouse spleen lymph node datasets [104] (SLN111D1, SLN111D2, SLN208D1, and SLN208D2) and the cell type labels are provided by TotalVI (https://  github.  com/ Yosef  Lab/  total  VI\_  repro  ducib  ility). These datasets were sequenced in two batches. The SMAGE-seq datasets (PBMC3K and PBMC10K) can be downloaded from the 10X Genomics website (https://  www.  10xge  nomics.  com/  resou  rces/  datas  ets). Labels are transferred by Signac [100] (v1.4.0) from the annotated datasets. The DLPFC datasets [105] can be downloaded from http://  spati  al.  libd.  org/  spati  alLIBD. The spatial-CITE-seq data [106] of human tonsil sample can be downloaded from GEO (https://  www.  ncbi.  nlm.  nih.  gov/  geo/  query/  acc.  cgi?  acc = GSE21  3264). The Stereo-CITE-seq mouse thymus dataset and the spatial ATAC-RNA-seq mouse brain data [107] can be downloaded from https://  zenodo.  org/  recor  ds/  10362  607. The mouse embryonic E15.5 brain [108] (MISAR-seq) data can be obtained from https://  doi.  org/  10.  5281/  zenodo.  74800

[69.](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7480069)

## Code availability

An open-source software implementation of SMOPCA is publicly available under the MIT license on GitHub: https:// github.com/cmhimself/SMOPCA [109] and Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15187362 [103].

## Declarations

## Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not applicable.

## Consent for publication

Not applicable.

## Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Received: 14 February 2024   Accepted: 12 April 2025

## References

1. Vandereyken K, Sifrim A, Thienpont B, Voet T. Methods and applications for single-cell and spatial multi-omics. Nat Rev Genet. 2023;24:494-515.

2. Zhou X, Franklin RA, Adler M, Jacox JB, Bailis W, Shyer JA, Flavell RA, Mayo A, Alon U, Medzhitov R. Circuit design features of a stable two-cell system. Cell. 2018;172:744-757.e717.
3. Armingol E, Officer A, Harismendy O, Lewis NE. Deciphering cell-cell interactions and communication from gene expression. Nat Rev Genet. 2021;22:71-88.
4. Bich L, Pradeu T, Moreau JF. Understanding multicellularity: the functional organization of the intercellular space. Front Physiol. 2019;10:1170.
5. Deng Y, Bai Z, Fan R. Microtechnologies for single-cell and spatial multi-omics. Nature Reviews Bioengineering. 2023;1:769-84.
6. Dimitrov D, Türei D, Garrido-Rodriguez M, Burmedi PL, Nagai JS, Boys C, Ramirez Flores RO, Kim H, Szalai B, Costa IG, et al. Comparison of methods and resources for cell-cell communication inference from single-cell RNA-Seq data. Nat Commun. 2022;13:3224.
7. Method of the year 2019: single-cell multimodal omics. Nat Methods. 2020;17:1-1.
8. Zhang Y, Tang Y, Sun S, Wang Z, Wu W, Zhao X, Czajkowsky DM, Li Y, Tian J, Xu L, et al. Single-cell codetection of metabolic activity, intracellular functional proteins, and genetic mutations from rare circulating tumor cells. Anal Chem. 2015;87:9761-8.
9. Li YE, Preissl S, Hou X, Zhang Z, Zhang K, Qiu Y, Poirion OB, Li B, Chiou J, Liu H, et al. An atlas of gene regulatory elements in adult mouse cerebrum. Nature. 2021;598:129-36.
10. Han X, Zhou Z, Fei L, Sun H, Wang R, Chen Y, Chen H, Wang J, Tang H, Ge W, et al. Construction of a human cell landscape at single-cell level. Nature. 2020;581:303-9.
11. Klein Allon M, Mazutis L, Akartuna I, Tallapragada N, Veres A, Li V, Peshkin L, Weitz David A, Kirschner Marc W. Droplet barcoding for single-cell transcriptomics applied to embryonic stem cells. Cell. 2015;161:1187-201.
12. Macosko Evan Z, Basu A, Satija R, Nemesh J, Shekhar K, Goldman M, Tirosh I, Bialas Allison R, Kamitaki N, Martersteck Emily M, et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression profiling of individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell. 2015;161:1202-14.
13. Domcke S, Hill AJ, Daza RM, Cao J, O'Day DR, Pliner HA, Aldinger KA, Pokholok D, Zhang F, Milbank JH, et al. A human cell atlas of fetal chromatin accessibility. Science. 2020;370: eaba7612.
14. Cao J, O'Day DR, Pliner HA, Kingsley PD, Deng M, Daza RM, Zager MA, Aldinger KA, Blecher-Gonen R, Zhang F, et al. A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression. Science. 2020;370: eaba7721.
15. La Manno G, Siletti K, Furlan A, Gyllborg D, Vinsland E, Mossi Albiach A, Mattsson Langseth C, Khven I, Lederer AR, Dratva LM, et al. Molecular architecture of the developing mouse brain. Nature. 2021;596:92-6.
16. Zhang K, Hocker JD, Miller M, Hou X, Chiou J, Poirion OB, Qiu Y, Li YE, Gaulton KJ, Wang A, et al. A single-cell atlas of chromatin accessibility in the human genome. Cell. 2021;184:5985-6001.e5919.
17. Pijuan-Sala B, Griffiths JA, Guibentif C, Hiscock TW, Jawaid W, Calero-Nieto FJ, Mulas C, Ibarra-Soria X, Tyser RCV, Ho DLL, et al. A single-cell molecular map of mouse gastrulation and early organogenesis. Nature. 2019;566:490-5.
18. Cao J, Spielmann M, Qiu X, Huang X, Ibrahim DM, Hill AJ, Zhang F, Mundlos S, Christiansen L, Steemers FJ, et al. The single-cell transcriptional landscape of mammalian organogenesis. Nature. 2019;566:496-502.
19. The Tabula Sapiens C, Jones RC, Karkanias J, Krasnow MA, Pisco AO, Quake SR, Salzman J, Yosef N, Bulthaup B, Brown P, et al: The Tabula Sapiens: A multiple-organ, single-cell transcriptomic atlas of humans. Science, 376:eabl4896.
20. Mimitou EP, Cheng A, Montalbano A, Hao S, Stoeckius M, Legut M, Roush T, Herrera A, Papalexi E, Ouyang Z, et al. Multiplexed detection of proteins, transcriptomes, clonotypes and CRISPR perturbations in single cells. Nat Methods. 2019;16:409-12.
21. Peterson VM, Zhang KX, Kumar N, Wong J, Li L, Wilson DC, Moore R, McClanahan TK, Sadekova S, Klappenbach JA. Multiplexed quantification of proteins and transcripts in single cells. Nat Biotechnol. 2017;35:936-9.
22. Chen S, Lake BB, Zhang K. High-throughput sequencing of the transcriptome and chromatin accessibility in the same cell. Nat Biotechnol. 2019;37:1452-7.
23. Ma S, Zhang B, LaFave LM, Earl AS, Chiang Z, Hu Y, Ding J, Brack A, Kartha VK, Tay T, et al. Chromatin potential identified by shared single-cell profiling of RNA and chromatin. Cell. 2020;183:1103-1116.e1120.
24. Wang X, Sun Z, Zhang Y, Xu Z, Xin H, Huang H, Duerr RH, Chen K, Ding Y, Chen W. BREM-SC: a bayesian random effects mixture model for joint clustering single cell multi-omics data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020;48:5814-24.
25. Lin X, Tian T, Wei Z, Hakonarson H. Clustering of single-cell multi-omics data with a multimodal deep learning method. Nat Commun. 2022;13:7705.
26. Stoeckius M, Hafemeister C, Stephenson W, Houck-Loomis B, Chattopadhyay PK, Swerdlow H, Satija R, Smibert P . Simultaneous epitope and transcriptome measurement in single cells. Nat Methods. 2017;14:865-8.
27. Liu Y, DiStasio M, Su G, Asashima H, Enninful A, Qin X, Deng Y, Nam J, Gao F, Bordignon P , et al. High-plex protein and whole transcriptome co-mapping at cellular resolution with spatial CITE-seq. Nat Biotechnol. 2023;41:1405-9.
28. Jiang F, Zhou X, Qian Y, Zhu M, Wang L, Li Z, Shen Q, Wang M, Qu F, Cui G, et al. Simultaneous profiling of spatial gene expression and chromatin accessibility during mouse brain development. Nat Methods. 2023;20:1048-57.
29. Liu Y, Yang M, Deng Y, Su G, Enninful A, Guo CC, Tebaldi T, Zhang D, Kim D, Bai Z, et al. High-spatial-resolution multi-omics sequencing via deterministic barcoding in tissue. Cell. 2020;183:1665-1681.e1618.
30. Tian T, Zhang J, Lin X, Wei Z, Hakonarson H. Model-based deep embedding for constrained clustering analysis of single cell RNA-seq data. Nat Commun. 1873;2021:12.
31. Hu J, Li X, Coleman K, Schroeder A, Ma N, Irwin DJ, Lee EB, Shinohara RT, Li M. SpaGCN: integrating gene expression, spatial location and histology to identify spatial domains and spatially variable genes by graph convolutional network. Nat Methods. 2021;18:1342-51.
32. Zhao E, Stone MR, Ren X, Guenthoer J, Smythe KS, Pulliam T, Williams SR, Uytingco CR, Taylor SEB, Nghiem P , et al. Spatial transcriptomics at subspot resolution with BayesSpace. Nat Biotechnol. 2021;39:1375-84.
33. Shang L, Zhou X. Spatially aware dimension reduction for spatial transcriptomics. Nat Commun. 2022;13:7203.
34. Gayoso A, Steier Z, Lopez R, Regier J, Nazor KL, Streets A, Yosef N. Joint probabilistic modeling of single-cell multiomic data with totalVI. Nat Methods. 2021;18:272-82.

35. Argelaguet R, Velten B, Arnol D, Dietrich S, Zenz T, Marioni JC, Buettner F, Huber W, Stegle O. Multi-Omics Factor Analysis-a framework for unsupervised integration of multi-omics data sets. Mol Syst Biol. 2018;14: e8124.
36. Kim HJ, Lin Y, Geddes TA, Yang JYH, Yang P . CiteFuse enables multi-modal analysis of CITE-seq data. Bioinformatics. 2020;36:4137-43.
37. Hao Y, Hao S, Andersen-Nissen E, Mauck WM 3rd, Zheng S, Butler A, Lee MJ, Wilk AJ, Darby C, Zager M, et al. Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data. Cell. 2021;184:3573-3587.e3529.
38. Do VH, Rojas Ringeling F, Canzar S. Linear-time cluster ensembles of large-scale single-cell RNA-seq and multimodal data. Genome Res. 2021;31:677-88.
39. Gu M, Shen W. Generalized probabilistic principal component analysis of correlated data. J Mach Learn Res. 2020;21:Article 13.
40. Tian T, Zhang J, Lin X, Wei Z, Hakonarson H. Dependency-aware deep generative models for multitasking analysis of spatial omics data. Nat Methods. 2024;21:1501-13.
41. Lopez R, Regier J, Cole MB, Jordan MI, Yosef N. Deep generative modeling for single-cell transcriptomics. Nat Methods. 2018;15:1053-8.
42. Long Y, Ang KS, Sethi R, Liao S, Heng Y, van Olst L, Ye S, Zhong C, Xu H, Zhang D, et al. Deciphering spatial domains from spatial multi-omics with SpatialGlue. Nature Methods. 2024;21(9):1658-67.
43. Velten B, Braunger JM, Argelaguet R, Arnol D, Wirbel J, Bredikhin D, Zeller G, Stegle O. Identifying temporal and spatial patterns of variation from multimodal data using MEFISTO. Nat Methods. 2022;19:179-86.
44. McInnes L, Healy J, Melville J. Umap: uniform manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:180203426. 2018. https://  arxiv.  org/  pdf/  1802.  03426.
45. Schep AN, Wu B, Buenrostro JD, Greenleaf WJ. chromVAR: inferring transcription-factor-associated accessibility from single-cell epigenomic data. Nat Methods. 2017;14:975-8.
46. Bravo González-Blas C, Minnoye L, Papasokrati D, Aibar S, Hulselmans G, Christiaens V, Davie K, Wouters J, Aerts S. cisTopic: cis-regulatory topic modeling on single-cell ATAC-seq data. Nat Methods. 2019;16:397-400.
47. Dumais ST. Latent semantic analysis. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (ARIST). 2004;38:189-230.
48. Ashuach T, Reidenbach DA, Gayoso A, Yosef N. PeakVI: a deep generative model for single-cell chromatin accessibility analysis. Cell Reports Methods. 2022;2: 100182.
49. Xiong L, Xu K, Tian K, Shao Y, Tang L, Gao G, Zhang M, Jiang T, Zhang QC. SCALE method for single-cell ATAC-seq analysis via latent feature extraction. Nat Commun. 2019;10:4576.
50. Maynard KR, Collado-Torres L, Weber LM, Uytingco C, Barry BK, Williams SR, Catallini JL, Tran MN, Besich Z, Tippani M, et al. Transcriptome-scale spatial gene expression in the human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2021;24:425-36.
51. Li Z, Zhou X. BASS: multi-scale and multi-sample analysis enables accurate cell type clustering and spatial domain detection in spatial transcriptomic studies. Genome Biol. 2022;23:168.
52. Zhu J, Shang L, Zhou X. SRTsim: spatial pattern preserving simulations for spatially resolved transcriptomics. Genome Biol. 2023;24:39.
53. Sun S, Zhu J, Zhou X. Statistical analysis of spatial expression patterns for spatially resolved transcriptomic studies. Nat Methods. 2020;17:193-200.
54. Korsunsky I, Millard N, Fan J, Slowikowski K, Zhang F, Wei K, Baglaenko Y, Brenner M, Loh PR, Raychaudhuri S. Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with Harmony. Nature Methods. 2019;16:1289-96.
55. Reilly EC, Sportiello M, Emo KL, Amitrano AM, Jha R, Kumar ABR, Laniewski NG, Yang H, Kim M, Topham DJ. CD49a identifies polyfunctional memory CD8 T cell subsets that persist in the lungs after influenza infection. Front Immunol. 2021;12: 728669.
56. Fischer MB, Goerg S, Shen L, Prodeus AP , Goodnow CC, Kelsoe G, Carroll MC. Dependence of germinal center B cells on expression of CD21/CD35 for survival. Science. 1998;280:582-5.
57. Takai T. Roles of Fc receptors in autoimmunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2002;2:580-92.
58. Liao S, Heng Y, Liu W, Xiang J, Ma Y, Chen L, Feng X, Jia D, Liang D, Huang C, et al. Integrated spatial transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of fresh frozen tissue based on stereo-seq. bioRxiv. 2023:2023.2004.2028.538364. https:// www.  biorx  iv.  org/  conte  nt/  10.  1101/  2023.  04.  28.  53836  4v1.
59. McFadden D. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. 1973.
60. Zhang D, Deng Y, Kukanja P, Agirre E, Bartosovic M, Dong M, Ma C, Ma S, Su G, Bao S, et al. Spatial epigenometranscriptome co-profiling of mammalian tissues. Nature. 2023;616:113-22.
61. Ding J, Condon A, Shah SP. Interpretable dimensionality reduction of single cell transcriptome data with deep generative models. Nat Commun. 2002;2018:9.
62. Tian T, Zhong C, Lin X, Wei Z, Hakonarson H. Complex hierarchical structures in single-cell genomics data unveiled by deep hyperbolic manifold learning. Genome Res. 2023;33:232-46.
63. Van der Maaten L, Hinton G. Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of machine learning research. 2008;9:9.
64. Silverman BW. Density estimation for statistics and data analysis. Routledge; 2018.
65. Sheather SJ, Jones MC. A reliable data-based bandwidth selection method for kernel density estimation. J Roy Stat Soc: Ser B (Methodol). 1991;53:683-90.
66. Williams CK, Rasmussen CE. Gaussian processes for machine learning. MA: MIT press Cambridge; 2006.
67. Tipping ME, Bishop CM. Probabilistic principal component analysis. J R Stat Soc Ser B Stat Methodol. 1999;61:611-22.
68. Wen Z, Yin W. A feasible method for optimization with orthogonality constraints. Math Program. 2013;142:397-434.
69. Gu M, Shen W. Generalized probabilistic principal component analysis of correlated data. J Mach Learn Res. 2020;21:1-41.
70. Stein ML: Interpolation of spatial data: some theory for kriging. Springer Science &amp; Business Media; 2012.
71. Gelfand AE, Diggle P, Guttorp P, Fuentes M. Handbook of spatial statistics. CRC Press; 2010.

72. Hartikainen J, Särkkä S: Kalman filtering and smoothing solutions to temporal Gaussian process regression models. In,. IEEE international workshop on machine learning for signal processing. IEEE. 2010;2010:379-84.
73. Gu M, Xu Y. Fast nonseparable Gaussian stochastic process with application to methylation level interpolation. J Comput Graph Stat. 2020;29:250-60.
74. Pierson E, Yau C. ZIFA: dimensionality reduction for zero-inflated single-cell gene expression analysis. Genome Biol. 2015;16:241.
75. Kim TH, Zhou X, Chen M. Demystifying 'drop-outs' in single-cell UMI data. Genome Biol. 2020;21:196.
76. Sun S, Hood M, Scott L, Peng Q, Mukherjee S, Tung J, Zhou X. Differential expression analysis for RNAseq using Poisson mixed models. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017;45: e106.
77. Lea AJ, Tung J, Zhou X. A flexible, efficient binomial mixed model for identifying differential DNA methylation in bisulfite sequencing data. PLoS Genet. 2015;11: e1005650.
78. Sun S, Zhu J, Mozaffari S, Ober C, Chen M, Zhou X. Heritability estimation and differential analysis of count data with generalized linear mixed models in genomic sequencing studies. Bioinformatics. 2019;35:487-96.
79. Casale FP, Dalca AV, Saglietti L, Listgarten J, Fusi N: Gaussian process prior variational autoencoders. In: Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 10390-10401. Montréal, Canada: Curran Associates Inc.; 2018:10390-10401.
80. Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, Satija R. Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat Biotechnol. 2018;36:411-20.
81. Zheng GXY, Terry JM, Belgrader P, Ryvkin P, Bent ZW, Wilson R, Ziraldo SB, Wheeler TD, McDermott GP, Zhu J, et al. Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single cells. Nat Commun. 2017;8: 14049.
82. Hafemeister C, Satija R. Normalization and variance stabilization of single-cell RNA-seq data using regularized negative binomial regression. Genome Biol. 2019;20:296.
83. MacKay DJ: Bayesian methods for backpropagation networks. In: Models of neural networks III: association, generalization, and representation. New York City: Springer; 1996. pp. 211-254.
84. Mitchell TJ, Beauchamp JJ. Bayesian variable selection in linear regression. J Am Stat Assoc. 1988;83:1023-32.
85. Vaart A, Zanten J. Adaptive bayesian estimation using a Gaussian random field with inverse Gamma bandwidth. The annals of statistics 37. Ann Stat. 2009;37:2655.
86. Bhattacharya A, Pati D. Posterior contraction in Gaussian process regression using Wasserstein approximations. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA. 2017;6:416-40.
87. Saad Y: Numerical methods for large eigenvalue problems: revised edition. SIAM; 2011.
88. Kokiopoulou E, Chen J, Saad Y. Trace optimization and eigenproblems in dimension reduction methods. Numerical Linear Algebra with Applications. 2011;18:565-602.
89. Wolf FA, Angerer P, Theis FJ. SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis. Genome Biol. 2018;19:1-5.
90. Harris CR, Millman KJ, Van Der Walt SJ, Gommers R, Virtanen P, Cournapeau D, Wieser E, Taylor J, Berg S, Smith NJ. Array programming with NumPy. Nature. 2020;585:357-62.
91. Virtanen P, Gommers R, Oliphant TE, Haberland M, Reddy T, Cournapeau D, Burovski E, Peterson P, Weckesser W, Bright J. SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature methods. 2020;17:261-72.
92. Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, Blondel M, Prettenhofer P, Weiss R, Dubourg V, et al. Scikit-learn: machine learning in python. J Mach Learn Res. 2011;12:2825-30.
93. Jiang X, Xiao G, Li Q. A Bayesian modified Ising model for identifying spatially variable genes from spatial transcriptomics data. Stat Med. 2022;41:4647-65.
94. Yoav B, Daniel Y. The control of the false discovery rate in multiple testing under dependency. Ann Stat. 2001;29:1165-88.
95. Rand WM. Objective criteria for the evaluation of clustering methods. J Am Stat Assoc. 1971;66:846-50.
96. Strehl A, Ghosh J. Cluster ensembles -- a knowledge reuse framework for combining multiple partitions. J Mach Learn Res. 2003;3:583-617.
97. Vinh NX, Epps J, Bailey J. Information theoretic measures for clusterings comparison: variants, properties, normalization and correction for chance. J Mach Learn Res. 2010;11:2837-54.
98. Palla G, Spitzer H, Klein M, Fischer D, Schaar AC, Kuemmerle LB, Rybakov S, Ibarra IL, Holmberg O, Virshup I, et al. Squidpy: a scalable framework for spatial omics analysis. Nat Methods. 2022;19:171-8.
99. Signorell A, Aho K, Alfons A, Anderegg N, Aragon T, Arppe A, Baddeley A, Barton K, Bolker B, Borchers HW. DescTools: tools for descriptive statistics. R package version 099. 2019;28:17. https://  andri  signo  rell.  github.  io/ DescT  ools/  autho  rs.  html.
100. Stuart T, Srivastava A, Madad S, Lareau CA, Satija R. Single-cell chromatin state analysis with Signac. Nat Methods. 2021;18:1333-41.
101. Lein ES, Hawrylycz MJ, Ao N, Ayres M, Bensinger A, Bernard A, Boe AF, Boguski MS, Brockway KS, Byrnes EJ, et al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain. Nature. 2007;445:168-76.
102. Zhang Y, Liu T, Meyer CA, Eeckhoute J, Johnson DS, Bernstein BE, Nusbaum C, Myers RM, Brown M, Li W, Liu XS. Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol. 2008;9: R137.
103. Chen M, Cheng R, He J, Chen J, Zhang J. SMOPCA: spatially aware dimension reduction integrating multiomics improves the efficiency of spatial domain detection. Zenodo. 2025. https://  doi.  org/  10.  5281/  zenodo. 15187  362.
104. Gayoso A, Steier Z, Lopez R, Regier J, Nazor KL, Streets A, Yosef N. Joint probabilistic modeling of single-cell multiomic data with totalVI. Datasets. 2021. https://  github.  com/  Yosef  Lab/  total  VI\_  repro  ducib  ility.
105. Maynard KR, Collado-Torres L, Weber LM, Uytingco C, Barry BK, Williams SR, Catallini JL, Tran MN, Besich Z, Tippani M, et al. Transcriptome-scale spatial gene expression in the human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Datasets. 2021. http://  spati  al.  libd.  org/  spati  alLIBD.

106. Liu Y, DiStasio M, Su G, Asashima H, Enninful A, Qin X, Deng Y, Nam J, Gao F, Bordignon P , et al. High-plex protein and whole transcriptome co-mapping at cellular resolution with spatial CITE-seq. Datasets. 2023. https://  www. ncbi.  nlm.  nih.  gov/  geo/  query/  acc.  cgi?  acc = GSE21  3264.
107. Long Y, Ang KS, Sethi R, Liao S, Heng Y, van Olst L, Ye S, Zhong C, Xu H, Zhang D, et al. Deciphering spatial domains from spatial multi-omics with SpatialGlue. Datasets. 2024. https://  zenodo.  org/  recor  ds/  10362  607.
108. Jiang F, Zhou X, Qian Y, Zhu M, Wang L, Li Z, Shen Q, Wang M, Qu F, Cui G, et al. Simultaneous profiling of spatial gene expression and chromatin accessibility during mouse brain development. Datasets. 2023. https://  doi.  org/  10. 5281/  zenodo.  74800  69.
109. Chen M, Cheng R, He J, Chen J, Zhang J. SMOPCA: spatially aware dimension reduction integrating multi-omics improves the efficiency of spatial domain detection. Github. 2025. https://  github.  com/  cmhim  self/  SMOPCA.

## Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.